Edit Dev Services and UI for OIDC (#37566)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Dev Services and Dev UI for OpenID Connect (OIDC)
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security
:keywords: sso oidc security keycloak
:summary: Start Keycloak or other providers automatically in dev and test modes.
:topics: security,oidc,keycloak,dev-services,testing,dev-mode
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-oidc

> In this guide, you learn to use Dev Services and Dev UI for the OpenID Connect (OIDC) Keycloak provider. It also shows how to adapt these services for other OpenID Connect providers. Additionally, it guides you on using the Dev UI with OpenID Connect providers that have already been started before you run Quarkus in development mode.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

== Introduction

> Quarkus provides the Dev Services For Keycloak feature, which is enabled by default when the `quarkus-oidc` extension is started in dev mode and when the integration tests are running in test mode, but only when no `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` property is configured.

Author: Updated. Thanks!

> It starts a Keycloak container for both the dev and test modes. It initializes them by registering the existing Keycloak realm or creating a new realm with the client and users for you to start developing your Quarkus application secured by Keycloak immediately. The container restarts when the `application.properties` or the realm file changes have been detected.

Author: Great optimization, @sheilamjones. I went with the last suggestion: "It initializes them by registering the existing Keycloak realm or creating a new realm with the client and users required for you to start developing your Quarkus application secured by Keycloak immediately."

Additionally, xref:dev-ui.adoc[Dev UI] available at http://localhost:8080/q/dev[/q/dev] complements this feature with a Dev UI page, which helps to acquire the tokens from Keycloak and test your Quarkus application.

> If `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is already set, then a generic OpenID Connect Dev Console, which can be used with all OpenID Connect providers, is activated. For more information, see <<dev-ui-all-oidc-providers,Dev UI for all OpenID Connect Providers>>.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

[IMPORTANT]
====
When logging in to the Keycloak admin console, the username is `admin`, and the password is `admin`.
====

> Be aware that Dev Services For Keycloak defaults to not initiating a new container if it detects an existing container labeled `quarkus-dev-service-keycloak`. It connects to this container provided the value of the `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.service-name` property matches the label's value (default `quarkus`). In such cases, expect a slightly altered output when you run the following:

Author: Good catch. We've made it lower case now.

[NOTE]
====

> If the Keycloak container is not ready within the default 60-second timeout, you can resolve this by extending the timeout period. For instance, set it to 2 minutes with `quarkus.devservices.timeout=2M`.

Author: Thanks, Sheila. 
The IBM Style Guide, under "Numbers under 10",  says both forms are acceptable, and to be consistent. 
I searched the Quarkus docs for "minutes" and found that they consistently use the numeric form in cases like this one.

====

> You can turn off sharing the containers with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.shared=false`.

Author: Nice. Thanks!

> Now open the main link:http://localhost:8080/q/dev[Dev UI page] and observe the *OpenID Connect* card linking to a Keycloak page. For example:

Author: Updated. Thanks.

image::dev-ui-oidc-keycloak-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect card,role="center"]

> Click the *Keycloak provider* link. This action opens a Keycloak page whose appearance varies depending on how the Dev Services For Keycloak feature is configured.

Author: Went with "for". Thanks.

[[develop-service-applications]]
=== Developing service applications

By default, the Keycloak page can be used to support the development of a xref:security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc[Quarkus OIDC service application].

[[keycloak-authorization-code-grant]]
==== Authorization code grant

> If you set `quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=code` in `application.properties` (this is a default value), then an `authorization_code` grant is used to acquire both access and ID tokens. Using this grant is recommended to emulate a typical flow where a `Single Page Application` acquires the tokens and uses them to access Quarkus services.

Author: Updated multiple instances throughout the file. Thanks!

First, you see an option to *Log into Single Page Application*. For example:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Page - Log into Single Page Application,role="center"]

> Choose the Keycloak realm and client ID to use during the authentication process.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> Choose the Keycloak realm and client ID to use during the authentication process.

Author: Sorry, upon further reflection, I think we need to capitalize ID the conventional way. I verified that all 12 instances of "ID" appear in either "ID tokens" or "client ID", so the risk of confusion is minimal.

> Choose the Keycloak realm and client ID to use during the authentication process.

Author: cc: @sh

> Choose the Keycloak realm and client ID to use during the authentication process.

Reviewer: + 1. I would also suggest to capitalize "ID" in the conventional way. It is standard (and also part of the word usage guidelines) to capitalize "ID" and IMHO I don't think there would be confusion between the use cases outlined here. 
The only use case where I wouldn't capitalize would be for an instance where it was case-sensitive in for example, a command or code snippet, etc.

[NOTE]
====
This SPA represents a public OpenId Connect client; therefore, the client IDs you enter should identify public Keycloak clients that have no secrets. This is because SPA is not a web application and cannot securely handle the secrets it needs to complete the authorization code flow if the client secret is also expected to complete the authorization code flow.

> The clients requiring secrets can only be supported with this SPA if a default realm has been created or if `quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret` is configured and a single custom realm is used. In these cases, the SPA can figure out the client secret it might need to complete the authorization code flow after Keycloak redirected the user back to it.

Author: Both. I've replaced it with `In both cases,`. Thanks.

====

Next, after selecting *Log into Single Page Application*, you are redirected to Keycloak to authenticate, for example, as `alice:alice`. Then, you are returned to the page representing the SPA:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-test-service-from-spa.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Single Page Application,role="center"]

You can view the acquired access and ID tokens, for example:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-decoded-tokens.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Decoded Tokens View,role="center"]

This view shows the encoded JWT token on the left side and highlights the headers in red, payload or claims in green, and signature in blue. It also shows the decoded JWT token on the right side, where you can see the header, claim names, and their values.

Next, test the service by entering a relative service path and sending a token. SPA usually sends access tokens to the application endpoint, so choose the *With Access Token* option, for example:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-test-access-token.png[alt=Dev UI Keycloak - With Access Token,role="center"]

To clear the test results area, use the eraser icon in the lower right corner.

> Sometimes, ID tokens are forwarded to the application frontends as bearer tokens as well for the endpoints to be aware of the user who is currently logged into SPA or to perform an out-of-band token verification. Choose the *With ID Token* option in such cases.

Author: Good question, Sheila. @sberyozkin Does her suggestion express the intended meaning?

> Sometimes, ID tokens are forwarded to the application frontends as bearer tokens as well for the endpoints to be aware of the user who is currently logged into SPA or to perform an out-of-band token verification. Choose the *With ID Token* option in such cases.

Author: Whoops. Duplicated the sentence. Removing this one. Nice catch.

> Sometimes, ID tokens are forwarded to application frontends as bearer tokens. This helps endpoints identify the user logged into SPA or perform out-of-band token verification. Choose the *With ID Token* option in such cases.

Author: Thanks!

> Manually entering the service paths is not ideal. For information about enabling Swagger or GraphQL UI for testing the service with the access token already acquired by OIDC Dev UI, see the <<test-with-swagger-graphql,Test with Swagger UI or GraphQL UI>> section.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

image::dev-ui-keycloak-login-error.png[alt=Dev UI Keycloak Login Error,role="center"]

If the error occurs, log in to Keycloak by using the *Keycloak Admin* option, update the realm configuration as necessary, and check the `application.properties`.

[[test-with-swagger-graphql]]
===== Test with Swagger UI or GraphQL UI

You can avoid manually entering the service paths and test your service with Swagger UI or GraphQL UI if `quarkus-smallrye-openapi` or `quarkus-smallrye-graphql` are used in your project. For example, start Quarkus in dev mode with both `quarkus-smallrye-openapi` and `quarkus-smallrye-graphql` dependencies. You can see the following options after logging in to Keycloak:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-test-service-swaggerui-graphql.png[alt=Test your service with Swagger UI or GraphQL UI,role="center"]

> For example, clicking *Swagger UI* opens the Swagger UI in a new browser tab where you can test the service using the token acquired by Dev UI for Keycloak.

Author: Updated a couple of instances of this in this document.

The Swagger UI does not try to re-authenticate again. In the Swagger UI, do not choose a Swagger UI `Authorize` option; the OIDC Dev UI has authorized and provided the access token for Swagger UI to use for testing.

Integration with GraphQL UI works similarly; the access token acquired by Dev UI for Keycloak is used.

[NOTE]
====

> You should register a redirect URI for the authorization code flow initiated by Dev UI for Keycloak to work. This is because Keycloak might enforce that the authenticated users are redirected only to the configured redirect URI. It is recommended to do this in production to avoid the users being redirected to the wrong endpoints, which might happen if the correct `redirect_uri` parameter in the authentication request URI has been manipulated.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

If Keycloak enforces it, you see an authentication error informing you that the `redirect_uri` value is wrong.

In this case, select the *Keycloak Admin* option in the top right corner, login as `admin:admin`, select the test realm and the client which Dev UI for Keycloak is configured with, and add `http://localhost:8080/q/dev-ui/io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc/keycloak-provider` to `Valid Redirect URIs`. If you used `-Dquarkus.http.port` when starting Quarkus, then change `8080` to the value of `quarkus.http.port`

If the container is shared between multiple applications running on different ports, you must register `redirect_uri` values for each application.

You can set the `redirect_uri` value to `*` only for test purposes, especially when the containers are shared between multiple applications.

If no custom realm is imported, Dev Services For Keycloak sets the `redirect_uri` value to `*` when it creates a default realm.
====

==== Implicit grant

> If you set `quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=implicit` in `application.properties`, then an `implicit` grant is used to acquire both access and ID tokens. Use this grant to emulate a `Single Page Application` only if the authorization code grant does not work; for example, when a client is configured in Keycloak to support an implicit grant.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

==== Password grant

If you set `quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=password` in `application.properties`, then you see a screen similar to this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-password-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Page - Password Grant,role="center"]

> Select a realm, enter a client ID and secret, user name and password, a relative service endpoint path, and click *Test service*. It returns a status code, such as `200`, `403`, `401`, or `404`.

Reviewer 2: @rolfedh FYI, I think this suggestion from Sheila makes sense

> If the username is also set in `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` map property containing usernames and passwords, then you do not have to set a password when testing the service.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> But be aware that you do not have to initialize `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` to test the service using the password grant.

Author: @sberyozkin, please could you comment on Sheila's question? Thanks!

> But be aware that you do not have to initialize `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` to test the service using the password grant.

Author: I've updated it with `service by using the` for now. Please let me know if this is incorrect.

> But be aware that you do not have to initialize `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.users` to test the service using the password grant.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

==== Client credentials grant

If you set `quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=client`, then a `client_credentials` grant is used to acquire a token, with the page showing no *User* field in this case:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-client-credentials-grant.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Page - Client Credentials Grant,role="center"]

Select a realm, enter the client ID and secret, a relative service endpoint path, and click *Test service*. It returns a status code, such as `200`, `403`, `401`, or `404`.

[[develop-web-app-applications]]
=== Developing OpenID Connect web-app applications

To develop a xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc[Quarkus OIDC web application], set `quarkus.oidc.application-type=web-app` in `application.properties` before starting the application.

Starting the application displays a screen similar to this one:

image::dev-ui-keycloak-sign-in-to-service.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Sign In,role="center"]

Set a relative service endpoint path and click *Log in to your web application*.
You are redirected to Keycloak to enter a username and password in a new browser tab before you get a response from the Quarkus application.

> In this case, the Dev UI does not enrich the developer experience.

Reviewer 2: @sheilamjones May be delete that line but say `In this case the Quarkus OIDC web-app application controls the authorization code flow and acquires the tokens.` ?

> In this case, the Dev UI does not enrich the developer experience.

Reviewer 2: @sheilamjones Actually, this is what the next line already says it.

So, lets try `In this case, the Dev UI is not very helpful because the Quarkus OIDC web-app application controls the authorization code flow and acquires the tokens` and remove line `#196`

> In this case, the Dev UI does not enrich the developer experience.

Author: Updated. Thanks!

 * `duke` with a `dukePassword` password and a `reader` role
 * `john` with a `johnPassword` password and `reader` and `writer` roles

> To customize the client id and secret, you can use the `quarkus.oidc.client-id` and `quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret` properties.

Author: IIRC, Sergey had asked me to keep the ID in client `id` lower case to help prevent confusion with the ID in "ID token".  Now, I've revisited this aspect of the document and believe it would be okay to capitalize ID consistently. I've updated the doc accordingly.

image::dev-ui-keycloak-admin.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect Keycloak Page - Keycloak Admin,role="center"]

Sign in to Keycloak as `admin:admin` to further customize the realm properties, create or import a new realm, or export the realm.

== Disable Dev Services for Keycloak

Dev Services for Keycloak is not activated if either `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is already initialized or the default OIDC tenant is disabled with `quarkus.oidc.tenant.enabled=false`, regardless of whether you work with Keycloak or not.

If you prefer not to have a Dev Services for Keycloak container started or do not work with Keycloak, then you can also disable this feature with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false` - it is only necessary if you expect to start `quarkus:dev` without `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url`.

The main Dev UI page includes an empty *OpenID Connect* card when Dev Services for Keycloak is disabled and the `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` property has not been initialized:

image::dev-ui-oidc-card.png[alt=Dev UI OpenID Connect card,role="center"]

> If `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is already set, then a generic OpenID Connect Dev Console, which can be used with all OpenID Connect providers, can be activated. For more information, see the <<dev-ui-all-oidc-providers,Dev UI for all OpenID Connect Providers>> section.

Author: Thanks. I just revisited all the xrefs to ensure the titles in them match the actual titles.

[[dev-ui-all-oidc-providers]]
== Dev UI for all OpenID Connect providers

> If `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` points to an already started OpenID Connect provider (which can be Keycloak or other provider), `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is set to `service` (which is a default value) or `hybrid` and at least `quarkus.oidc.client-id` is set then `Dev UI for all OpenID Connect Providers` is activated.

Author: Good suggestion, @sheilamjones. I took it one step further with:
```suggestion
The Dev UI for all OpenID Connect Providers is activated if the following conditions are met:

* The `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` points to an already started OpenID Connect provider, which can be Keycloak or other provider.
* The `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is set to `service`, the default value, or `hybrid`.
* The `quarkus.oidc.client-id` is set.
```

> If `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` points to an already started OpenID Connect provider (which can be Keycloak or other provider), `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` is set to `service` (which is a default value) or `hybrid` and at least `quarkus.oidc.client-id` is set then `Dev UI for all OpenID Connect Providers` is activated.

Reviewer: Hi @rolfedh,  
Your update looks great and really clear. I just noticed two very minor things that perhaps could be changed:
- Change capitalization "P" in "OpenID Connect Providers" to "providers"
- Propose to say "which can be Keycloak or another provider"  (update to say "another" instead of "other"

...
----

If the provider metadata discovery has been successful, then after you open the main link:http://localhost:8080/q/dev[Dev UI page], you can see the following *OpenID Connect* card referencing a `Google` provider:

image::dev-ui-oidc-devconsole-card.png[alt=Generic Dev UI OpenID Connect card,role="center"]

> Follow the link to log in to your provider, get the tokens, and test the application. The experience is the same as described in the <<keycloak-authorization-code-grant,Authorization Code Grant for Keycloak>> section, where the Dev Services for Keycloak container has been started, especially if you work with Keycloak.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> You likely need to configure your OpenId Connect provider to support redirecting back to the `Dev Console`. Add `http://localhost:8080/q/dev-ui/io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc/`providerName`-provider` as one of the supported redirect and logout URLs, where `providerName` must be replaced by the name of the provider shown in Dev UI, for example, `auth0`.

Author: Went with
```suggestion
You likely need to configure your OpenId Connect provider to support redirecting back to the `Dev Console`. You add `http://localhost:8080/q/dev-ui/io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc/<providerName>-provider` as one of the supported redirect and logout URLs, where `<providerName>` must be replaced by the name of the provider shown in the Dev UI, for example, `auth0`.
```

> The Dev UI experience described in the <<keycloak-authorization-code-grant,Authorization Code Grant for Keycloak>> section might differ slightly if you work with other providers. For example, an access token might not be in a JWT format, so it won't be possible to show its internal content, though all providers should return an ID Token as JWT.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

[NOTE]
====
The current access token is used by default to test the service with Swagger UI or GrapghQL UI. If the provider (other than Keycloak) returns a binary access token, then it is used with Swagger UI or GrapghQL UI only if this provider has a token introspection endpoint; otherwise, an `IdToken`, which is always in a JWT format is passed to Swagger UI or GrapghQL UI. In such cases, you can verify with the manual Dev UI test that `401` is always returned for the current binary access token. Also, note that using `IdToken` as a fallback with either of these user interfaces is only possible with the authorization code flow.
====

> Some providers, such as `Auth0` do not support a standard RP-initiated logout, so the provider-specific logout properties must be configured for a logout option to be visible. For more information, see xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#user-initiated-logout[OpenID Connect User-Initiated Logout].

Author: Updated. Thanks.

Similarly, if you want to use a `password` or `client_credentials` grant for Dev UI to acquire the tokens, then you might need to configure some extra provider-specific properties, for example:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=password
quarkus.oidc.devui.grant-options.password.audience=http://localhost:8080
----

== Dev Services and Dev UI support for other OpenID Connect providers

> Your custom extension would need to extend `quarkus-oidc` and add the dependencies required to support your provider to the extension's `deployment` module only.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

> The build step dealing with the `Dev Services` should additionally register two runtime properties into the `io.quarkus.quarkus-oidc` namespace: `oidcProviderName` (for example, `Google`) and `oidcProviderUrlBase` (for example: `mycompany.devservices-google`) for the *OpenID Connect* card to link to the Dev UI page representing your provider, for example:

Author: Updated. Thanks.

====

Some providers, such as `Auth0` do not support a standard RP-initiated logout, so the provider-specific logout properties must be configured for a logout option to be visible. For more information, see xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#user-initiated-logout[User-initiated logout] section in the "OpenID Connect authorization code flow mechanism for protecting web applications" guide.

Similarly, if you want to use a `password` or `client_credentials` grant for Dev UI to acquire the tokens, then you might need to configure some extra provider-specific properties, for example:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.devui.grant.type=password
quarkus.oidc.devui.grant-options.password.audience=http://localhost:8080
----

> == Dev Services and Dev UI support for other OpenID Connect providers

Reviewer 2: @rolfedh FYI, @michalvavrik removed this section as it does not work in new DevUI, so I' not sure why it is visible in your PR

Author: Ooops! I must have added it back by accident while resolving the merge conflict. I've removed the section now and checked for any similar errors. I believe this PR is ready for merge now.

----

Additionally, the extension should produce an `io.quarkus.oidc.deployment.devservices.OidcProviderBuildItem` to disable the default Dev Services For Keycloak, instead of the users having to type `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.enabled=false`.

For more ideas, follow the xref:dev-ui.adoc[Dev UI] tutorial and check the `extensions/oidc/deployment` sources.

== Non-application root path considerations

> This document refers to the `http://localhost:8080/q/dev-ui` Dev UI URL in several places where `q` is a default non-application root path. If you customize `quarkus.http.root-path` or `quarkus.http.non-application-root-path` properties, then replace `q` accordingly. For more information, see the https://quarkus.io/blog/path-resolution-in-quarkus/[Path Resolution in Quarkus] blog post.

Author: Updated. Thanks.
